# Self-Supervised Driver Distraction Detection for Imbalanced Datasets
The role of driver distraction in the occurrence of road traffic accidents is of pivotal importance on a global scale. Furthermore, the effective detection of distraction is com- plicated by the imbalanced nature of typical driving datasets, which often lack sufficient observations of certain behaviors. This study examines the task of driver distraction detection using the State Farm Distracted Driver Detection and the Drive&Act datasets. The primary objective is to address the issue of data imbalance in a label-free manner in an unlabeled training dataset. To address the issue of data imbalance, we propose a novel data-loading technique, Clustered Feature Weighting (CFW). This label-free approach integrates trans- fer learning, unsupervised clustering, and weighted random sampling. The proposed method improves class balance during model training, thereby enhancing overall performance and robustness. The methodology encompasses model selection and embedding extraction, variance analysis, clustering, and weight generation. Experiments are conducted using both supervised and self-supervised learning (SSL) methods. The results demon- strate the effectiveness of SSL methods in enhancing the adapt- ability and robustness of driver distraction detection systems, particularly in handling non-uniform class distributions. CFW significantly improves class balance within training batches, thereby enhancing the accuracy and generalization of driver distraction detection models. Our code will be published on GitHub.

# Methodology of the Clustered Feature Weighting

The process involves two main stages. The first stage focuses on feature extraction (a to c), while the second stage employs batch-wise density-based clustering using HDBSCAN in the latent space to generate weights for a weighted random sampler (d to f).

